# hurricane-predictor-time-series

Abstract: Weather prediction is an integral component of how humans foresee and prepare for future conditions. Tropical cyclones, a specific type of weather phenomena, require complex calculations and continuous predictions due to their rapidly evolving nature. Humans depend on accurate predictions based on temporal, spatial, and analytical data to react appropriately to hazardous weather. When appropriate measures are taken, lives can be saved, infrastructure damage minimized, and economic stability maintained. However, weather predictions take time and necessitate immense computational power for accurate results through complex mathematical algorithms and advanced data analysis systems. This paper evaluates the implementation of an alternative: machine learning (ML) models for predicting tropical cyclone attributes. The training variables include general cyclone features in addition to best track wind radii, a recent inclusion in hurricane databases. To simulate a predicted forecast, a regression model given a sliding window first predicts various cyclone features. Then, based on these regressed features and an additional sliding window, classification models determine the status of the cyclone at that specific time. The classifiers tested in this study’s approach include gradient boosting, random forest, support vector machine, and multi-layer perceptron. After hyperparameter tuning and training on augmented data, the random forest model proves to be the most optimal, achieving an accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score of 93%. The remaining models also achieve weighted averages and an accuracy of above 90%. The random forest model demonstrates the highest sensitivity to false negatives, considered to be the most crucial result. The observed losses in performance may be due to insufficient training data for certain classes and limited versatility in training features. ML models ultimately thus prove to be an effective solution for cyclone forecasting.
